This morning, we're discussing this illustration that Jesus gave concerning the unrighteous
Jewel.
Of course, it's founded in Luke chapter 16, verses 1 through 8.
What is the real lesson behind this illustration that Jesus gave?
Well, it's interesting to note that many people get distracted even before they find out
what the lesson is.
How is that so?
Well, when the reading the scriptures and read chapter 15 of Luke, they see what has
been described one of the most powerful illustrations Jesus ever gave, that of the so-called
Particle Son or the Wasteful Son.
And then, as they read on, they come to this illustration, which has been described
as one of the most puzzling illustrations Jesus gave.
Why are so many people concerned or puzzled by this illustration?
Well, some people feel that Jesus is supporting and condoning dishonest use of funds.
But is that really the case?
Should we get distracted wondering why Jesus used this illustration?
Well, as Bible students, it's always good for us to see what the Bible says.
So let's take our Bibles and turn together to Luke chapter 16, and then rather than
having a preconceived idea, let's see what Jesus actually said as recorded here in Luke 16.
Reading verse 1, it says, then he also said to the disciples,
a rich man had a steward who was accused of handling his goods wastefully.
Now, here's the first question.
We notice this man, Jesus doesn't say he was found condemned or he was actually doing something
that had been proven to be wrong, but he mentions here he was accused.
The Watchtower made the interesting comment that this doesn't necessarily mean to say he did
something wrong, but he was accused of it.
In fact, the Greek that was used here to record this illustration allows for the fact that perhaps
he could have been slandered.
And what was he accused of?
Well, notice the last word there in verse 1 of handling his goods wastefully.
So he wasn't accused of stealing, but using things wastefully.
It's interesting to note that the word used here for wastefully is the same word that's used
in the previous illustration of the Particle Sun in chapter 15, verse 13, where it speaks of
the Particle squandering the inheritance. Now, in that case, the Particle or the wasteful
Sun didn't steal the money from his father, did he? He received it in a legal way,
but then the point was he squandered it.
So likewise here we see that this steward was accused of wastefully using what was the masters.
Well, let's consider what he was told in verse 2.
So he called him and said, what is this I hear about you?
Hand in the account of your stewardship, for you can no longer manage the house.
So what did the master say to the steward? Did he say to him, you're going to prison?
Are we going to have a court case? No. In fact, he didn't even immediately remove him from that
position of authority, but what did he say to him? You need to hand in the account.
So in other words, the manager didn't really know what the steward was doing,
but he allowed him the opportunity now to hand in this account.
So when we look at the background of what actually was said here, and we think of it from
the viewpoint of those who listened to Jesus, it seems that what the steward had done and then
when proceeded to do was actually legitimate and legal. He was concerned about his future.
If he knew that he had to hand in an account that would result in him going to prison,
then certainly he probably wouldn't have acted the way that he did.
But this raises some questions, doesn't it? Perhaps we might think, well, he went ahead and reduced
the debts of various ones. Wasn't that the wrong thing to do? Well, to get the true understanding of
this, it's good for us to take note of what the watchtower, the November watchtower this year,
and in the section that says, did you know, it tells us there what was involved with a steward's
responsibility. In biblical times, apparently a steward could be the manager or the one who ran a
household or an estate. Often times the owner would just leave everything completely to the steward
to care for. All he was interested in was the final results. Would he get a profit or not?
Now, it's interesting that in this watchtower article, it mentions the case of Joseph,
and what do we remember from what Genesis 39 tells us? It says that,
Portofa let left everything in Joseph's control, and he had no thought of anything except the
food that he was receiving. So here we have a situation where this steward is a manager of an estate,
the master really isn't concerned with all the details of what's happening, at least up to this
point, and he still has authority. So those that were listening to Jesus, what may they have
thought about? Well, we don't know for sure, but perhaps they may have thought of this steward
reducing the interest rate, or perhaps he reduced his personal commission that was originally
put on these loans, or perhaps originally in his enthusiasm, he overcharged them, and now he was
reducing it down to the normal price. Whatever the case, we know that a steward who is a manager,
like many managers today, have the right to write off certain debts completely, and even forgive
certain debts. So obviously, then, as the watchtower has pointed out, this steward still had full control,
and had the responsibility and the authority to be able to make whatever changes he saw fit.
So that begs the question, was he dishonest? Well, when we read a number of versions of the Bible
in English, they actually say the dishonest steward, and they use the term dishonest. But let's
have a look and see again what the Bible actually says. The New World Transition very accurately
translates it this way in verse 8, and his master commended the steward, though unrighteous,
you see, he doesn't say dishonest, doesn't say he was a thief, although unrighteous because
he acted with practical wisdom. So when we think of this, the steward didn't do the right thing,
that's what unrighteous means, it's a very broad statement, and what would have been the right thing
to do things for the master. But in this case, he was doing something for himself.
Now, some Bible translators have tried to capture that thought. Let me read you one example.
It says, his boss acknowledged that the business manager who had permitted the invoices to be changed
had acted cleverly in his own selfish interest. Do we know exactly all the details behind what Jesus
was saying? No. But what does this help us to see? Don't jump to conclusions. Read what the
Scripture says, and don't get distracted by details that could take away from the beautiful
lesson that we should gain. And what is the lesson? Jesus tells us, let's look in verse 9.
Also, I say to you, make friends for yourselves by means of the unrighteous riches, so that when such fail,
they may receive you into the everlasting dwelling places. What's the lesson? We need to use our
assets, our material assets, in a way that makes friends with Jehovah and Jesus that results in
something good. And we notice there in verse 9, it says, when these fail, it doesn't say if,
and we realize is Jehovah's servants that eventually the commercial systems of this world
will fail. Whatever money we have, whatever assets we have, it's just like this to it. They don't
really belong to us, and soon we're not going to have them to use. So surely, we would want to use
them to Jehovah's praise and to make friends with Jehovah. So what assets do better lights have?
Well, we have our own personal assets, few as they may be, but also we make use of the assets
of the organization. Remember, we may not be tempted to be dishonest with those assets,
but could we be wasteful with those assets? Well, that brings us to the final thought in verse 10,
where Jesus said, the person faithful in what is least, that is with regard to material things and
assets, is faithful also in much. And the person unrighteous in what is least is unrighteous also
in much. What's the lesson? Don't get distracted by details, step back and see what is the illustration
telling us. And in this case, a beautiful reminder that we should use whatever we have to Jehovah's glory.